I was under the impression for many many
years that cancer was a genetic disease
there's no question about it I was
indoctrinated just like almost everybody
else so you you actually kind of talk
about some of this in your uh recent
paper which I've actually sort of
printed out as very provocative um once
you realize that it's a mitochondrial
metabolic disease I think we can drop
the death rate by 50% in 5 to to 10
years depending on how you go after
you're going to see that needle Drop In
your experience does that kill cancer
cells if you remove the sugar I don't I
I don't believe so mitochondrial
inefficiency of is necessary and
sufficient I think we always have the
though is a known risk factor right so
well you have risk factors for sure but
is is it a primary risk factor or a
secondary yeah well thank you again
Lauren um thank you for bringing us
together to discuss this um yeah I'm Tom
seed I a professor of
biology here at Boston College and I
teach cancer uh
metabolism and uh to the um seniors
mostly Juniors and seniors and grad
students and also General biology to um
the non-
majors uh and I do spend considerable
amount of time discussing uh cancer uh
uh even because you know I find that um
cancer is a is a is a field that can
interact and integrate many aspects of
biology and uh cell biology biochemistry
and genetics and if if you try to give
those subjects in a in a very dry way
you know it goes in one ear and out the
other they don't really assimilate but
when you link it to a particular
significant problem like cancer then
they can begin to uh tune in a little
bit more to the importance and make
these biological linkages in
relationship to a disease so we can
touch upon a lot of different parts of
of cell biology genetics metabolism in a
general biology class just by
integrating the concept of cancer and
how it how it affects those so this is
what I this is what I do and I and a
week from today I will start my classes
here at BC um and we'll run for the for
the whole semester and and next year as
well sounds good yeah and I've had you
on the platform before to talk about
your what you have seen in research uh
and it definitely goes against what I
would say the the typical
understanding of what these cancer
causes are I'm going to ask you the same
thing Dr buns what what you know a
little bit about you and what your
bringing to the table as far as
understanding um cancer yeah yeah sure
so I'm Fred buns I'm an associate
professor of radiation oncology and
molecular radiation Sciences at Johns
Hopkins University I'm also a member of
the kiml uh Cancer Center there which is
a comprehensive cancer center that does
research training uh and sees people
with all kinds of cancers um so my my
primary role at at Hopkins is as a uh as
an investigator so uh you know my my lab
tackles sort of a variety of subjects
that um mostly revolve around one
particular uh uh tumor suppressor Gene a
gene that's involved in cancer called
p-53 we also work on some uh cancer
Therapeutics and Gene Therapies in my
lab um so the other major hat I wear is
a is as a an educator so I um I'm one of
the directors of our uh uh program in
cellular and molecular medicine which is
like the largest graduate program um at
John's Hopkins school of medicine so
it's basically as it sounds it's a PhD
program uh so I do quite a bit of
teaching uh in that I rent a number of
summer programs our Cancer Center um
including a program where we bring
medical students from around the country
to hopefully uh get them excited about
cancer research and and and hopefully
have them consider uh careers uh in
oncology um and so and I guess um and
thank you Lauren for this invitation and
I guess I'm really here to sort of
represent the uh the consensus consensus
view that cancer is a genetic disease
and I'm sort of looking forward to
discussing you know why I think that um
and why and probably less important what
I think but you know why why is that the
cons consensus view where where does
that come from right
awesome yeah thank you and definitely
worth noting too the way I found you was
through your work um prin the the book
that I researched um that came up was
called the principle of cancer genetics
and that is a book widely used it's a
textbook more or less used by tons of
colleges and in different courses to
educate people on cancer so um that was
your book and that was one of the
biggest one of the most reputable books
I found when doing this research for who
to bring on and talked with Prof
Professor C so um really really two very
impactful people here I think to
simplify all this um like you said Dr
buns you approached this from seeing
cancer as a genetic disease and then uh
Professor uh CED you kind of approached
this from more of the auto warberg
Theory um which opposes that view and
we're going to get into all of that here
in a second so the way this is going to
go um is obviously just a conversation
that we're going to have but I'm going
to have some questions that I'm going to
go through and I'm going to you know
list off just one by one and obviously
you guys will just get a couple minutes
to respond and then you know State your
opinion or your facts that you have and
then we can go back and forth for each
person to have a chance to respond and
toss it around so without any further
Ado I'm going to start with my first
question here um and thank you both for
being willing to do this and I'm excited
I'm excited to get into this so the
first question that I have is really um
something
that's been very interesting to me now
that I've been living life eating mostly
meat I I do mostly a carnivore diet
carnivore lifestyle and I have seen how
much that's benefited me in my health
and my mental health physical health
everything so you know from my
understanding two of the bigger factors
that go into causing cancer as far as
you know what could be part of the
somatic Theory like what you're
representing um Dr buns is one smoking
is a huge cancer cause it seems like and
two is obesity and the amount of body
fat that one actually has you know on
their body those are two very large
arguments as to what can cause cancer um
there's an argument to be made that body
F that the higher amount of body fat
could be causing it um but that also
that might have nothing to do with it
actually it might be in fact an issue
with what might be causing obesity so
that could be for example um insulin
resistance or uh chronic inflammation
those are two things that come with
obesity so it's not necessarily obesity
that's causing cancer but it's in fact
the insulin resistance and possibly
inflammation um is it possible that
cancer is caused by insulin resistance
and inflammation and I'm going to toss
this first to you um Professor caed if
you wouldn't mind addressing that yeah
well
um let me me just say first of all that
uh as we know uh right now cancer is is
killing about uh almost 1,700 people A
Day in the United States from the work
of the American Cancer Society which
which comes to about 70 people an hour
and and these dead bodies pile up year
in and year out um so uh obviously we
have a major problem that seems to be uh
getting worse uh year in and and year
out we're not making
any major drop in death rates or I would
say death rates in dead bodies per day
so um but as far as the Obesity epidemic
is
concerned um uh obesity is an is an
effect of an imbalance of nutrients um
there is a correlation between obesity
and risk of cancer and and some have
said that by looking you see more cancer
in obese people but I think it is
uh a reflection of the
inflammation uh and and Insulin
insensitivity and you have a lot of
underlying metabolic problems that go go
into this um so the question is how
would uh systemic inflammation in the
body lead to uh a tumor in a particular
organ uh of a person that that would
have this and and the answer is we and
others have shown uh that obesity uh
correction that inflammation um can
damage uh morphogenetic fields in
mitochondrial function uh it creates
oxid oxidative stress in in in the
mitochondria of cells in a particular
organ and uh this leads to um mutations
in the nucleus and disregulated cell
growth so so um yeah inflammation uh is
a provocative uh agent that can underly
a number of different disorders cancer
just being one of them um but um how we
view uh inflammation as the linkage to
uh Dam the to the damage to the resp
respiratory system in the cell producing
reactive oxygen species which then lead
to nuclear gene mutations as a a
downstream epiphenomenon but but the
issue of course is disregulated cell
growth how how does that lead to a cell
uh going out of control and when a cell
has damage oxidated phosphorilation it
falls back on the default state of of
fermentation and fermentation is linked
to disregulated cell growth um so uh
we've put together the pathway from uh
provocative agents like inflammation uh
or or these kinds of things and
specifically linked to obesity because
people do uh understand that there is
some sort of a connection between the
Obesity but it's more linked to systemic
inflammation and also you have elevated
glucose which d D the disregulated
fermentation of these cells so blood
sugar is there elevated but that's just
a facilitator it's just the fuel uh
what's driving the what's causing the
problem is the damage to oxidative
phosphorilation uh leading to secondary
Downstream effects that's that's that's
the way I would address that question
okay and and I just really quick before
I get to you Dr buns I want to
clarify I have spoken with you professor
caed before about this and I had to get
like very much clear on what your
talking about there's a lot of science
going on in there that I don't
necessarily know about right so for
people that are listening and tell me
where I'm wrong with this but I'm going
to try to get it right um ultimately
cells are supposed to use oxygen to
generate energy and what happens is from
in your theory is that you know once a
cell can no longer use oxygen anymore
they have to revert to you know
basically old school ways of generating
energy that is something only like
cancer cells really do normal cells
generate energy through oxygen and so
basically the issue right now is that
you're saying many of these cancer cells
in your theory cannot um produce energy
correctly and so they have to fall back
into uh what's it called fermentation
fermentation it's energy without oxygen
energy without oxygen so yeah and all
can every can all cancers that we know
of uh have a a dependency on
fermentation and every organ every type
of canc cancer cell um they have a dep a
dependency on fermentation and that's
that's when you look under the electron
microscope and you look at the number
structure and function of mitochondria
and you see in in every major cancer
that that that all all major Cancers and
I published this they have abnormalities
in the number structure and function of
mitochondria but it doesn't happen
overnight it's a protracted problem it
takes it it can take months years for
the cell to transition away from
oxidative phosph phation to substrate
level phosphorilation which is the
origin of fermentation um it doesn't
mean that there's no oxidative
phosphorilation it just means that it's
insufficient the cell cannot
survive uh it cannot live without energy
energy becomes the central issue and
people need to know how every cell in
our body has to have energy where does
the energy come from yes most of we
breathe air we we that oxygen drives
energy in our cells but cancer cells can
uh
they they can survive without oxygen and
even when oxygen is present they
continue to ferment they continue to
ferment because the oxidative
phosphorilation system is insufficient
it's not gone completely it's just
insufficient so uh you have to have uh a
sufficient level of energy and don't
forget the singular largest consumer of
energy in any given cell is the membrane
pump uh 30 to 70% of energy comes from
the pumps um without the to to maintain
an electrical potential across the
membrane and if that pumps don't get
energy the cell swells and dies it under
goes death um and if you stop oxidative
phosphorilation like cyanide will kill
you quickly but cancer cells can live in
cyanide so clearly they're not they're
not using oxidative phosphorilation
they're fermenting and that's the that's
the the singular biggest difference
between normal cells and cancer cells
cancer cells can live and grow without
oxygen um and ferment yeah so okay um so
basically you're saying yes that
inflammation in all of the insulin
resistance Can it can absolutely be a
cause of this cancer now I want to move
this to uh to you Dr um Dr buns what is
your thought on that question I'll
restate it is it possible that cancer is
caused by insulin resistance and
inflammation and it's not necessarily
the smoking or the Obesity that is
causing it if that makes sense yeah yeah
so so so let me just start very quickly
by I just want to address one point that
Professor C freed mentioned which is the
sort of the rates of cancer incident so
I I think it's an important you know and
this is a um a uh you know a thought
that gets bounced around like like my
gosh there's more cancer than ever um in
fact the incidence rates of most common
forms of cancer have been steadily
dropping um for the last couple of
decades um you know colon cancer uh
breast cancer um you know and stomach
cancer probably most um you know most is
one of the you know ones that's really
gone from a major source of cancer
morbidity mortality so one now that's
really one of the more rare cancers so
in general the news is quite good um now
Professor CRA is quite correct in that
the the absolute number of uh people
that are dying from cancer is still high
it's it's way too high um however part
of that is is that we're not dying from
other causes as much you know people are
living longer our population is aging um
it's one reason that cancer centers like
ours are um pretty much have all the
business we can handle um but the again
the good news is that for most common
types of cancer the incidence is going
down now unfortunately that's not true
across the board um so you know
pancreatic cancer which is one of the
most lethal kinds of cancer it's very
it's you know very stubbornly uh stable
uh in terms of incidents and in fact
seeing uh while the overall rates of
coloral cancer are are going down
precipitously um in recent years um a
really sort of distressing finding is
now that more younger people are getting
coloral cancer um you know whereas
largely you know cancer by and large is
a disease of Aging so there's definitely
something um that we're still trying to
figure out as as to why that is but
again the news is good um the the other
key point I want to make make too is um
survival after cancer diagnosis is now
way better than it's been you know the
dramatic changes since the 1970s when
the current regimens of radiotherapy
chemotherapy and and more more recently
targeted therapies have have come online
uh the results have been um really
strikingly positive you know people are
living longer with cancer um and with
longer time you know until recurrence
so uh and so which is really you know
real real life extensions with some of
the therapies are currently being used
so anyway I didn't want your listeners
to you know I want you I think it's I
think it's an important thing to be
aware of so it's not all gloom and doom
um but yes we absolutely need to do
better um so getting to your question um
you know so inflammation is
unquestionably a
critical um uh a critical aspect of of
tumor growth uh and that is is is very
clear in experimental models it's very
clear uh when we actually look at
cancers uh under the microscope we can
actually see the inflammation we can see
these inflammatory infiltrates um so
cancer so so inflammation is both part
of the tumor itself so it's what we call
in the cancer in the tumor micro
environment there's sort of a whole
inflammatory aspect for most sort of
common solid tumors um and further and
furthermore s systemic inflammation is
clearly uh clearly a driver of cancer
now you know maybe there's no um no
tissue where that's sort of more vividly
uh evident than in the colon so um
there's a a com a fairly common disease
called ulcer ulcerative colitis so it's
basically an inflammatory disease of the
that mainly affects the colar rectal
epithelium um and it's basically you
know sort of chronic inflammation in the
colon um it's and it's well known um
that patients with that disorder have a
greatly elevated risk of developing
colal cancer later in their lives so
again that's just one of many examples
that show the really the concrete um you
know relationship uh between um between
inflammation uh immune dysfunction and
and cancer so in that regard I will I
will uh agree with Professor Safra you
know regarding the importance of both um
inflammation uh and also metabolism you
know I want to one thing I want to touch
upon I think Lauren that you mentioned
was this idea that sort of the war you
know War bergian metabolism the war the
famous warberg effect and somehow the
you know the cancer Gene Theory are
somehow in opposition um really not true
at all I mean it's actually um you know
the warberg effect is is real it's it's
it's pretty much universally accepted
among um people in the the cancer
research field the cancers um as
Professor sa fre has mentioned are uh
they they they um they basically
function metabolically in this in this
mode that we call you know aerobic
aerobic glycolysis so that sort of
fermentation and the presence of oxygen
um is so it's a very unusual uh type of
uh type of metabolism um that is uh um
interestingly also a characteristic of
of pathogen infection
um so it's it's it's definitely part of
the disease process but as I'll describe
as hopefully as we as we go on to
discuss it's actually not the underlying
cause of the
cancers okay and inflammation is or
sorry uh insulin resistance is that all
coupled into your response there too or
is that just with inflammation yeah yeah
no it's really they're very interrelated
you know so it's it's very well known
that you know in a sense obesity um does
have inflammatory aspects it's known
that know people that are obese have um
have issues with you know inflammation
in various tissues so there they really
the some of these systemic um so you
could talk about local inflammation like
in the case of ulcerative colitis but
it's also sort of systemic um you know
inflammation um that that has been
associated with obesity and in both of
those cases um it's definitely an
important ingredient and in sort of
promoter of of sort of tumor
progression okay okay okay uh Lauren go
ahead can I can I ask Fred a question
yeah please sure uh you know I I
appreciate your looking at cancer as a
as the rate um but you know um when uh
President Nixon in 1971 declared the war
on cancer uh when we talk about wars we
don't talk about the number of soldiers
killed per uh number of people in the
society we count dead bodies uh that's
the way we talk talk about war and when
you have 1,700 people a day dying I
don't know how anyone could sugarcoat
that number this is a 70 an hour I mean
we can talk about the rates and we can
talk about this you got seven 70 Souls
an hour dying from this disease 1,700 a
day and and then and then um you know
when you look at that and you say they
live longer these poor many many of
these poor folks are suffering miserably
from the toxic therapies that they were
given to give them an extra overall
survival and many of these guys they
don't live very much longer I I I work
in gleo blastoma they haven't made a
singular advance in a hundred years a
hundred years in Glo blastoma and you
get metastatic cancer and you're just as
going to well you have your survival is
no different today than it was 75 years
ago if you treat uh stage one tumors
you're going to have a lot of success
and you're going to keep people alive a
lot longer but let's not try to
sugarcoat 1700 people a day dying from
cancer I I don't think there's that's
good news you know let me be very clear
I am not I am not interested in like
sugar cating um you know that that um
that the death toll again it's it's
really you know a leading cause of death
in our in our society so there's no way
around that however I think our you know
our audience can take some perhaps
solace in that your risk of cancer as an
individual is going to be lower than it
was for your
grandparents um you know you know and
that's where the number is sort of I
think the incidence rates have become
very significant so again they're
they're more people yeah we have a
larger you know larger country than we
did 20 years ago you know so all these
there many aspects you know ways that
you can look at it so you know I guess
you know maybe you know I'm I'm more of
an optimist I'm very excited by the
progress we've made but I'm also
motivated to to to sort of continue the
progress into into into tumors like Leo
blastomas where I I totally agree
there's been very very little progress
in in those types of tumors but I think
rather than focus on those we could all
at the same time say well you know the
other side of the coin is there's some
cancers that were almost universally
fatal chronic myologist leukemia for one
um which now is a very survivable for
form of cancer so we're living in a
world where uh cancers that were killing
people uh a generation or two ago are
now very
manageable Dr CED would you agree with
that um uh you know to an extent I would
but I I still think um we're not making
any major progress the death the death
keeps going up I count dead bodies and
every year they get worse and worse if
you have something that works um like uh
the the proteas cocktail for AIDS
you got a dramatic drop in De
um it was like overnight you could see
we have continual increase in cancer um
and yeah we're we're we're we're
starting to treat a lot of cancers far
earlier uh these zero cancers stage ones
and these kind you can have success with
that however if you're going to radiate
and and poison people to make them
healthy you also put them at risk for
later on afflictions and I I I I see so
many people coming they yes they do live
longer but but living longer from a a
minor a minor tumor uh you take a guy
with stage four uh lung cancer uh he
ain't going to live that long uh and um
and the treatments they give these guys
today are just horrific um so uh I'm
looking at a situation that's out of
control I'm not looking at something
that we're making any major progress and
I'll let the people judge for themselves
all you have to do is look at the
obituary pages and you're going to see
the numbers of dead people uh um
politicians movie stars uh businessmen
industrialists these guys they were all
at risk and and yes they're younger the
people I agree with Fred there's no
question about it I'm seeing it myself
we're younger and younger I I didn't I
can't believe how many emails I'm
getting from people in their in their uh
early 30s and early 40s with colon
cancer and all these kinds of cancers
and it and it basically has to do with
our diet and lifestyle uh we're we're
we're eating more High highly processed
foods we're not exercising nearly enough
and and we're putting ourselves at risk
not only for cancer but for a variety of
other chronic diseases as well um but
but you know the I was under the
impression for many many years that
cancer was a genetic disease there's no
question about it I was indoctrinated
just like almost everybody else but then
I started to see cancers that have no
mutations and I said where how do you
explain cancer as a genetic disease when
you have when you have mut when you have
some cancers that have no mutations as
stratton's group and Parson's group and
verg's group and all these groups are
seeing no no mutations in cancers I I I
find that shocking and then I thought
well maybe maybe there's only some
mutations that lead to this like these
driver mutations and now we find all
these driver mutations in normal tissues
that never become cancer I said how how
is that possible you know what what's
going on with that and then and then the
the nail in the coffin to me was the the
nuclear transfer mitochondrial transfer
experiments I mean when you when you
view all of these inconsistencies
together um you you you can't rationally
think that this is a disorder of genetic
regulation we have never found a tumor
that that that goes by without
fermentation uh we have never found a
tumor with normal number structure and
function of mitochondria regardless of
what their genetic mutations are and
Fred knows that almost every cell in a
tumor has a different genetic profile
than any other cell in the tumor
different tumors there's thousands and
thousands of mutations now that are
being found in these cancers but they're
all fermentors so the common phenotype
of cancer is fermentation metabolism
driven by insufficient oxidative
phosphorilation we we have found no
tumors that are are different from that
although they are different genetically
for sure okay how would you Fred tell me
how how you deal with tumors that have
no mutations yeah um that you know
that's an interesting question you know
so I was looking at you know so you you
actually kind of talk about some of this
in your uh recent paper which I've
actually sort of printed out is very
provocative um let me I I guess the
simplest way to to address that is there
really virtually no tumors that have
been detected with no
mutations okay so the the papers that
you site um in this in this manuscript
so the one um one from The Stratton
Group which is uh a well-known uh it's
it's the the basically the Sanger Center
uh in in the UK which is a major
uh sequencing Hub um uh globally um so
they they did a study in early
2007 um that uh where they basically
looked at a panel of I think 550 or so
uh genes and they were able to use uh
sequencing Technologies at the time that
were very novel and Powerful um and they
found um mutations in many of those
tumors um and so they and the the genes
they chose to look at genes that um
encoded a class of protein that we call
there enzymes called protein kinases um
they were known to to play an important
role in Signal
transduction um and notably protein
kinases are uh are actually uh enzymes
that we can actually Target with some
drugs so they were they took a very
focused look at this set of genes um to
look um very broadly in in a a set
series of several hundred cancers to see
whether they would find
mutations okay so let me let me what did
they say about the 73 tumors that had no
absolutely no mutations that's in 550
genes okay we we have about 20,000 genes
no no but they had seven they had no
mutations of the 550 genes and 73 out of
the 200 tumors they looked at right yeah
and that's that that's that's that's
tumors without mutations no they did
they didn't sequence the rest of the
genome
they know they're they're looking at you
know what is that okay so so they they
were they did not do a deep dive on
these on these tumors then they found
some no no so they they didn't have the
ability to um so notably and this is
maybe a little plug for my institution
later that same year in 2007 the very
first complete cancer exom uh exomes
were sequenced at Johns Hopkins
University so in that in those cases
they were actually able to look at all
the 20 something thousand uh protein
encoding genes um and what they found
they found mutations in all of them
there were there were no tumors where
where there were no I just saw the 73
that didn't have well and then the new
work by vers Verte in 20 2020 says that
we can't find mutations in Endo
blastomas um so it's not just some yes I
agree with you 100% these are not common
but if you find any any T any tumor
where there's no mutation like the B the
B20 uh tumor that the G blastoma had no
no mutations any of three mag signaling
Cascades it raises a question um uh like
okay um and when I looked at the papers
that had these no no mutation the
authors of those studies never addressed
that why why would you not ignore an
observation not consistent with your
with your hypothesis so so I think I
think you're misunderstanding I think
you're misunderstanding the data with
all due effect so again that that U the
paper by Parsons at all you just
mentioned um looking at the brain tumors
again that was another study but done by
my colleagues here at Johns Hopkins uh
you're right they found no mutations in
these three major signaling Pathways but
they found other mutations again
remember this is a time of Discovery
when they're discovering more different
Pathways so idh1 right I'm sure you're
very familiar with you know frequently M
mutated in uh in in gomas was not
you know was not known about that you
know it was only subsequently you know
delving deeper into the into the genomes
of these tors and finding these
recurrent mutations and by recurrent
Lauren I mean they find them in patient
after patient so not 100% of patients
will have every characteristic mutation
but all tumors have some mutations now
well I mean we can we can debate that
based on the data I would let I would
have the people look themselves at the
at the valume have them come to their
own their own I looked at it and I saw
tumors with no mutations but but but I
have to be honest with you yes I agree
most most cancers have a lot of
mutations and not every every cell in
the tumor has a different mutation uh
they some are common like p-53 but not
all tumor cells have p-53 mutations as
you know um but you know how do you
explain driver gene mutations now in all
these normal tissues that don't get
cancer so so something I want to bring
us back to because because we can go on
in in all the weeds that's the thing you
guys are such experts in this that you
can go in and in and I want you to but I
also want to bring it back to the level
that like that you know person like me
or somebody else who has cancer that
doesn't really know much about cancer
can understand and one of those
questions what I think is really
important is to really in just one
sentence say if you can and I know like
it might be a long sentence but like a
very simple
sentence what do you
believe causes cancer or could you know
could could be causing it because I
think we need to clarify what otot
warberg thought in simpleton words right
and then also clarify what the genetic
mutation theory is what what the I guess
it would be the somatic mutations theory
is um and then we and then I'm going to
go into my next question so in one
sentence um Dr buns can you say what the
somatic mutations theory
is well so at the outside let me just
mentioned um I I prefer the um the
cancer Gene Theory as the way to sort of
describe it and the reason for it is
that not all cancer related mutations
are somatic um meaning they don't all
occur during the life of the individual
that in fact some of them can be
inherited through our geraline um either
through parents or during uh denovo
mutations that occur during embryonic
development again I don't want to go too
deeply into the woods but um you know so
essentially what what is the cancer Gene
Theory so the cancer Gene Theory U
sometimes referred to as a sematic
mutation Theory basically holds that um
cancer is a result of the accumulation
of critical
mutations uh in uh in genes that control
uh cell growth uh cell differentiation
and the ability of cells to be
recognized by the immune system um and
and and and that is um and and it's
really the um the uh the consequences of
those mutations are what give rise to
all the different um uh what we call
cancer cell phenotypes including the
warberg effect um including anupy which
is having sort of a um you know
a a non-modal number of chromosomes um
whole a whole bunch of different
characteristics of of cancer cells are
basically um uh are are all things we
need to need to know about to understand
the biology but again the underlying
cause of those effects are genetic
mutations got it okay and and yes or no
are they in some of them are inherited
not all of them right the mutations
correct correct most of them uh arise
during the lifetime of the individual
but in a small number of cases uh but
but significant number of cases uh
cancer mutations can be
inherited okay and and so you're what
you're expressing there is the generally
adopted theory behind cancer that's I
would say the most I would say the
theory that I would say most people
would agree with now now obviously
Professor C fre you're of the opposing
side to that now poke holes and what is
your theory the auto please explain what
the auto warberg theory
is and then you know what's the
difference between that and what Dr buns
just explained yeah well warberg claimed
that uh all cancers were fermentors
because the oxidative phosphorilation
system was inefficient and they had to
ferment and we know that uh fermentation
is the default energy State this is the
state of all uh organisms on the planet
before oxygen came into the atmosphere
two and a half billion years ago so at
that time everybody all the cells from
fossil work cellular fossil work where
their disregulated cell growth driven by
a fermentation
metabolism um when when you develop
caner today uh the cells uh get abnormal
energy metabolism the oxidative phosphor
becomes corrupted and and that leads to
the formation of reactive oxygen species
uh which are carcinogenic and mutogenic
and and Dr buns has gone through uh nose
that ra Ross or DNA damaging um um
um reactive oxygen the nitrogen re the
radical the oxygen radical they will
cause mutations in the nuclear genome in
the in the DNA it's known Ros cause
mutations they come from the
mitochondria why because the oxidative
phosph foration system is corrupted uh
it's inefficient and if it's inefficient
the cell has to turn on fermentation and
uh we see that all cancer cells are
fermenters we have never found a cancer
cell with a normal oxidative
phosphorilation system but the other
issue of course is when we take the
nucleus out of it uh all the nuclear
mitochondrial transfer experiments were
very revealing and letting us know
whether it was the genes in the nucleus
or it was um uh something in the
cytoplasm that was responsible for the
disregulated cell growth I think that
binging is coming because I'm using um
uh the the Chrome I don't usually use
Chrome and I think something is is
strange with my computer on the Chrome
but that's that's an is different issue
um but you know let let's let's look at
this when you take the nucleus of a
tumor cell with the somatic mutations
with the driver mutations and you put it
into a a a normal cytoplasm
uh you get regulated growth you don't
get disregulated growth so if these
genes are causing disregulated growth
why you don't get disregulated growth
when you transplant the the nucleus from
the tumor cell into the normal cytoplasm
and if you do the reverse experiment uh
that is if you take the normal nucleus
which has normal integrated genome and
put it into the cytoplasm of a tumor
cell you get disregulated growth uh
which is cancer uh and this has been
done in multiple invivo and inv vitro
experiments and and so so the thing that
I want to say I was that my question was
If This Were A genetic disease you would
expect the nucleus from the tumor cell
to uh derive disregulated growth which
is cancer and and it doesn't um but if I
take the normal nucleus and put it into
a tumor cytoplasm I get disregulated
growth so that clearly tells us it's the
cytoplasm and in the cytoplasm you have
mitochondria and the mitochondria energy
dictates the cell cycle in the cyclin
through the proton through the uh
electrochemical gradient in the inner
membrane of the mitochondria the
mitochondria is responsible for cancer
damage the oxidative and the mutations
in the nucleus are effects of the of the
Ross produced in the mitochondria so I'm
looking at some cancers with no
mutations driver gene mutations in
normal cells that never develop this
this plastic growth and I'm looking at
the nuclear transfer experiments any one
of those factors alone would would raise
serious questions as to the validity of
the sematic mutation Theory okay so so
with that said and I know you gota I
know you want to respond Dr buns just
to so to keep us on track here something
that I'm very curious about is
understanding Sugar's the impact of
sugar on our cells and how that might
cause issues with let's say mutations or
let's say the mitochondria right is
there some kind of
understanding that that we can can we
agree that sugar is a problem when it
comes like overc consumption of sugar is
a problem um even if it's just two
different theories here Dr buns would
you agree that sugar is an issue sugar
consumption and that would probably tie
back into insulin resistance you know as
a result yeah yeah to some extent um you
know I think you know access to large
amounts of readily digestible
carbohydrates like sugars um you know is
is is a well-known factor that can uh
promote you know uh insulin resistant
diabetes later in life which is
absolutely U you know a risk factor for
for cancers so I think uh you know diet
um is a very important aspect of uh you
know what we call you know we all have
what we call risk factors right some
some of them are not modifiable means
mean there's nothing we can do about our
parents there's nothing we can do about
our genetic inheritance um and there's
nothing we can do about random mutations
that arrive arise during cell division
um however we can we can control our
behaviors like smoking um alcohol
consumption and certainly diet is
another U highly modifiable risk factor
um that that we can really consider when
we talk about cancer prevention not that
it's easy to you know for people to
actually um you know change their
lifestyle and change their diets um but
uh but many people would stand to
benefit um by by taking a hard look at
at uh at you know at what they're
eating okay and with and with your
theory would you argue that if the way
that you're saying that um how you
understand the theory is that you might
just have the genetics that they become
mutated and sugar might just not help
that you know it's not going to be
helpful but it's not necessarily sugar
that's the Cause
right well you know diet or something
yeah yeah you know it's you know so we
really turn talk you know in terms of
risk so again uh insulin insulin
dependent uh insulin resistant diabetes
is certainly a cancer risk factor not
all people you know W with that with
that disorder are going to develop
cancer so again it's it's a numbers game
you know we see disproportionate number
of people that have sort of these
metabolic uh you know metabolic health
issues um for sure and and it's and it's
a very it's hard to deny that that is
likely playing a causitive role um and
and many people are looking at uh
perhaps that's why we're seeing uh you
know increasing rates of of cancer in
younger people now um now those
increases are very as as I mentioned
very concerning but they still as a
whole represent a very small proportion
of of cancer uh of cancer overall U but
obviously when cancer occur is occurring
in younger people we really stand up and
take notice so there are a lot of people
now taking a really uh sort of Deep dive
into what might be going on um in terms
of uh our current modern day exposures
diets and I think um again uh diet
obesity uh and hor hormone exposures are
really I think at at the top of many
people's lists as they think about um
you know what might be causing these uh
cancers in young people okay and and
removing sugar in your opinion and I'm
specifically sitting on the sugar thing
I know that I'm kind of harping on it do
you in your experience does that remove
does that kill cancer
cells I I don't you remove the sugar I I
don't believe so um you know because
because the body has a lot of ways of
producing those um you know the the
fundamental building blocks of
metabolism so you don't necessarily have
to have processed sugar um so so yeah so
my short answer to that is no um but but
I think you know all things in
moderation is sort of generally you know
a good um you know a good way to kind of
consider your own diet got it okay thank
you yeah so let's go to you Professor
CED I'm going to ask you same question
do you think that sugar has an um you
know could sugar potentially be a cause
of
cancer um issues that you're seeing
specifically in the mitochondria and
generating energy um well sugar let's be
honest sugar is not a
carcinogen um you you can use the ases
tests and put sugar on sugar does not
cause mutations in the nucleus sugar
itself does not uh damage uh
mitochondria uh what damages
mitochondria is systemic inflammation
radiation intermittent hypoxia um you
know oncogenic viruses all of which uh
impact negatively on the structure and
function of the mitochondria if if you
have a neoplastic growth in your body
elevated sugar in the blood stream will
make the tumor grow faster because it's
a prime fermentable fuel but the sugar
itself is not a carcinogen so so you
have to you have to separate uh uh cause
ality from from what's actually driving
uh the growth of the of the cell yes if
the numbers of studies that have been
shown in people with a broad range of
cancers whether it's breast colon brain
lung liver if you have high blood sugar
those folks don't live as long on the
planet as people that have lower levels
of sugar a glucose let's put it this way
it's glucose don't forget we we evolved
in a Paleolithic uh um period for tens
of thousands of years where highly
processed carbohydrates were not present
anywhere in our diet if you Albert
schwitzer looked at Native populations
that lived ACC according to their
traditional ways cancer was extremely
rare in these folks in fact he looked at
40,000 people in Africa can find one
it's it's in it's in the book no's book
um you know the ints of of of uh the nor
the north regions that cancer was UN
unknown as soon as they started uh the
Western diet and lifestyle little
exercise large amounts of Highly
processed foods they got systemic
inflammation obesity chronic heart
disease Cancer and a variety of other uh
disorders so sugar itself is not a cause
of cancer but sugar and all the other
highly processed foods with little
exercise don't forget we evolved as a
very active species we were not sitting
around uh uh getting hamburgers and
donuts through a window at a fast food
shop um that we're putting ourselves at
risk for Cancer and a variety of other
chronic diseases because of our diet and
our current diet and lifestyle our
technology has evolved so much faster
than our biology and as a result of that
we have a we put ourselves at tremendous
risk uh for these chronic diseases
cancer being a major one so yeah I
wouldn't get too hung up on sugar uh I I
would get hung up I would be more
concerned with uh your general diet
lifestyle and this is why we built the
um the glucose Ketone index calculator
to allow people to know if they're in
nutritional ketosis don't forget we
evolved in nutritional ketosis that's
who we are as a species um we would have
low blood sugar and elevated ketones
because weren't there was very little
carbohydrate in our diet we killed and
ate animals we ate let me ask you this
though with that let me ask you this on
that point because do you think that if
one were to remove mostly sugar from
their diet it would then kill cancer
cells let's say combined with other
things too well same question I asked
cancer can't live without the glucose
and the glutamine the amino acid
glutamine so if you're going and you
have to transition the whole body over
to ketones and fatty acids which the
cancer cells can't use because you need
a good mitochondria to burn those things
so that that's the solution to the
cancer problem you you lower the blood
sugar you target with drugs the
glutamine and you transition the body
over to nutritional ketosis okay and
that marginalizes the tumor so it's not
one you have to realize you have two
fuels driving the disregulated growth
the glucose and the amino acid glutamine
which is fermented in the mitochondria
it's not oxidized it's fermented and
that's our new findings so in order to
manage the disease you got to shut off
the energy and without energy these
cells can't grow they can't manage the
pumps and they
die not complicated right and for
anybody trying to understand your theory
is that cancer cells generate energy
through sugar glucose uh in large part
once they're generated and glutamine and
glutamine and okay so Dr buns what what
do you have to say about that yeah yeah
well that's that's that that is is is
very correct um you know again we the
the metab sort of the metabolic profile
of cancer cells has been studied for
many years we have a lot of insights as
to sort of how that um you know how
those cells behave um you know let me
let me tell you a little you know a
little sort of anecdote a little story
about a really interesting experiment
that was done a number of years uh
number years ago that I think might um
perhaps sh shed some light on our
discussion and and and might further um
give you a little bit of a sense of why
you know how does genetics figure into
all of this um again with you know
talking about the the the uh abnormal
sort of mitochondrial functions uh you
know in cancers you know I I I I I sort
of agree with all of that you know
cancer cells do have very a barent um
metabolism so one of the thing the story
I want to tell has to do with a a cancer
Gene that's near and dear to my heart
it's called p-53 it was discovered many
years ago um we've been studying it for
years and we're still learning really
fascinating things about it um this is a
gene mutated about half give or take of
of all uh human cancers so it's very
prevalent it's not certainly not on all
of them um but but in a good in a good
solid proportion um and so one of the
ways that we've sought to learn about
p53 is to to basically uh alter that
Gene uh in mice so you know laboratory
mice or a common tool for studying um
you know as in a way of a a surrogate
for experiments that we can't obviously
do on on humans so we we actually you
know starting in the 1980s developed
technologies that recently really uh
come to the Forefront to actually uh
experimentally modify genes so you know
we don't have to speculate as much about
what genes are doing we can actually uh
go into cells and go into whole animals
modify uh a gene of interest in a very
specific way down to the individual um
you know DNA nucleo
uh and we can then see what effect that
uh that mutation has on um you know has
on that animal and so when p53 is uh is
mutated in mice um those mice become
highly predisposed to develop a variety
of of tumors now those tumors are very
different from the tumors that um arise
in the context of p-53 deficiency in
people and perhaps that's not surprising
since mice are very sort of anatomically
different and they only live about two
years but but anyway so we can basically
recreate in mice the sort of the
causitive effect of p-53 loss now okay
and now where the story comes into
metabolism uh a great friend and
colleague of mine named Paul hang who's
a a prominent investigator uh down at
the uh the NIH in Bethesda uh he did a
really cool experiment um he was very
much interested in uh in studying p-53
and its potential roles in regulating
metabolism so he took these
p-53 um what we call knockout mice
basically the p-53 gene had been
inactivated uh in this particular strain
of mice and you could compare those mice
with other mice that were completely
genetically identical except for that
one
mutation and so he did a really kind of
cool experiment to kind of look at their
metabolism and and he did a number of
things but maybe the most visually
striking was he put him in a swimming
pool so the mice so how you how do
measure sort of the metab metabolism of
mice and their energy level and their
glucose consumption so he had them uh in
a very unique uh apparatus that they
have at the NIH where the mice are
actually in a in a swimming pool with a
with a with an engineer sort of currents
and so the mice are sort of swimming and
swimming towards a
platform um and and basically swimming
against this current and so um the more
the mice that have higher energy
Reserves
um and the ones that have aerobic
aerobic metabolism which is a much more
efficient means of of generating uh of
generating glucose um and therefore and
a much more efficient way of generating
the ATP that M mitochondria need to be
efficient um those mice were able to
sort of you know swim really well and
and reach the platform the mice that had
p-53 mutations were all that you could
see them even with a like an underwater
camera all the mice were sort of um
becoming exhausted um so they were they
were unable to use glucose so they were
basically U more um they were
essentially fermenting glucose rather
than U you know they were using uh sort
of what we call a glycolytic pathway to
generate um ATP that sort of you know
that molecule of energy from glucose um
and so Paul my my friend and colleague
he he took a closer look at this so
there's a clear metap iic defect in
these mice with the p-53 mutation and
when they took a closer look at it it
turns out of the many genes the p53 is
known to regulate one of them is a gene
called sco2 which is an integral
integral component of the O of the
respiratory chain in
mitochondria so it it his study provided
the one of the very early links between
a common genetic alteration and a
metabolic defect that's that's
ubiquitous and cancer
now as I mentioned not all cancers have
p-53 mutations so presumably there are
also other mutations that um that can
similarly uh either directly or
indirectly affect these metabolic
pathways okay yeah well I I'm familiar
with that study as well and um yeah p-53
uh disrupts mitochondrial function um
and leaf many and uh other other
conditions and um you know you disrupt
mitochondrial function you're going to
force cells to rely heav more heavily on
fermentation um in order to to survive
so it would it's a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder and um uh the tumors
would be uh dependent on a fermentation
metabolism for disregulated growth so uh
you would then to manage that you would
simply Target the availability of the
fermentable fuels in the body of the
mouse or or the human I I I should say
and I I think I I think Fred's right you
have to be cautious in how you look at
certain animals with a a Sevenfold
difference in basil metabolic rate
compared to us um but but but the issue
of course here is that um p-53 mutations
uh can occur in the germ line like like
Leaf r manyi or they can happen uh a
secondary somatic mutations caused by a
reactive oxygen species so either way
you can have germine mutations in p-53
or you could have somatic mutations in
p-53 either way you're going to disrupt
the energy metabolism in the cells that
would have those those abnormalities
therefore they would be dependent so
that means the origin of the
disregulated growth is coming from A
disruption of oxidative phosphorilation
followed by a compensatory fermentation
so in order to manage those cancers you
would do the same thing you would do
with any cancer whe regardless of
whether they or not they have a p-53
mutation is that you would selectively
reduce the sugar in the body and Elevate
ketones and Target the glutamine the
glutamine is the second big fermentable
fuel in these in these cancer cells and
they ferment it in the mitochondria
through mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation um so you're going to
get those two fuels if you take one away
you'll slow it down if you take the
other way you slow it down but to get
rid of it you really got to hit those
two fermentable fuel simultaneously
while the body is in nutritional ketosis
so because your normal cells will get
really really healthy burning fatty
acids and ketones but the tumor cells
are
marginalized Professor would you agree
just just to sort of that not to talk
over you but so would you agree though
in those models and you know both in the
mice and in individuals with Leaf Fran
syndrome that the p-53 mutation is the
underlying cause of the metabolic
dysfunction so we're talking a little
bit about sort of what you know what's
the chicken and what's the egg yeah okay
that's extremely important extremely
important so the question is are they
primary or secondary risk factors is
what now is what and and whether you
have a germline mutation as being a a
mutation linked to a neoplastic
condition like and a germline is just
hereditary yeah hereditary yes so so
that would be true if if if the leaf
Reni mutation were 100% penetrant um no
known germline cancer that we have found
is 100% penetrant like like Huntington's
disease you got Huntington's disease
everybody that has a mutation in the
protein Huntington gets the gets the
disease leaf many is one of the
highest penetrance risk factors that we
know of genetically it's about 85% that
means 15% of the people who have that
mutation don't maybe for a tumor
suppressor genes or something like this
the only but the only the primary cause
is damage to oxidative phosphorilation
that's the primary I me the reason again
you know tumor Genesis is is a Time
dependent process right so you know
those you know again there's the sort of
that the risk factor um and and also
people you know this sort of that
stochastic um you know sort of you know
Factor as to when um you know people
will lose that additional Al of p-53
right so in other words so aaan syndrome
for our listeners is BAS basically a
condition that's caused by a mutation in
every cell in our body in the p-53 gene
so normally we have two healthy copies
of p-53 one we get from the paternal
side one from our mothers um in some
cases if we inherit one defective copy
of p-53 that leaves ourselves with only
a single functional copy so we in many
ways we're sort of you know we we can
develop normally but they're these
patients are at extremely high risk of
cancer now why why don't all all of them
develop cancer well they develop cancer
at different times in their lives you
know so it has to do um a little bit
with the luck of the draw when that
initial founding cell of the cancer
loses that remaining wild type uh p-53
Al that can the timing of that can vary
so not all you know not everybody gets
to age you know 45 with Leaf Aran
syndrome and gets cancer this there's a
range and some people are sort of you
know that range will be outside of their
normal lifespan so they won't get get
cancers um in some respects Professor um
the penetrance of Lea frani syndrome is
actually much closer to 100% and let me
let me tell you why um so among the
really interesting phenotypes of uh p-53
mutations in other words you know what
are the characteristics of people that
have a mutate mutant p53 in their G uh
germ line um so people with um who who
suffer from Leaf Fran syndrome also have
a metabolic phenotype um it's really
interesting and I i' I've talked to
Physicians that actually take care of
these uh of these families um and sort
of keep track of you know they kind of
monitor them for tumors because they're
at such high risk um one of the really
memorable things that one person told me
once is he can look down the hall so
often um you know families that are
afflicted with this disorder will bring
you know they're bringing the whole
family in for uh for a consultation the
kids everybody you can actually see from
down the hall which PE individuals are
affected um by Leaf Rani so again it's
it's it's a monoenic disorder so so not
everybody will uh will so about half the
The Offspring um from a a normal
individual and and an individual leafmen
syndrome only half the kids will carry
that trait um if you look down the hall
you can see um just by their assorted
body mass index um you can sort of tell
which are the
many uh mutation carriers so it's a so
so it's really F know to me to my mind
it really creates a vivid illustration
of the underlying role of genetics in in
in sort of this type of metabolic
dysfunction well I I I mean I'm not
opposed to that at all I mean when we
know that mutation affects the electron
transport chain uh what is intriguing to
me is that you would have a few and
you're right it's very high penetrant
I'm not arguing with you in fact it is
the highest of of any of any germ line
that I know of uh Leaf rameni is the
highest penetrant but it again it's not
100% and every one of the people who do
eventually get a tumor whether it's a
brain tumor ovarian tumor there's they
have a range of different kinds of
tumors in the body of those folks every
one of them is fermenting um and don't
forget you need enene turn on when when
when you have damage to oxidative
phosphorilation enco gen must turn on
the hif1 alpha the Mick and all these
they are facilitators of bringing the
fermentable fuels into those cells in
order to allow them to be uh shift to
the fermentation so so you have to you
you have to know when the genes are
playing a role as I said if you put a
new mitochondria the anco jees turn off
because there's no need to ferment uh
and they are the facilitators of of
fermentation yeah Leaf from manyi all
the tumors that we have have looked at
they're all they're all basically
fermenting because the mutation itself
damages oxidative phosphorilation so the
linkage the linkage is very tight but
all the others like braa one and
retinoblastoma they also damage
oxidative phosphorilation the penetrance
is lower than Leaf many for sure but
they every one of the the germline
mutations that I have looked at has
damage to oxidative phosphorilation with
compensatory fermentation now if you
damage oxidative phosphorilation and do
not get compensatory fermentation that
us causes death because you're going to
stop the energy you got to have energy
either from fermentation or oxos so so
um uh if you shut down oxos too quickly
cells will die they won't form tumor so
you have to have the upregulation of the
compensatory fermentation which is
driven by ancoines but these are
facilitators they're the effects not the
cause yeah well so so let me actually
address there's a point that you raised
earlier about um I believe you mentioned
uh these f ings that you know you can
actually find um cancer you know tumor
suppressor and oncogene mutations in
normal tissues right so how how could
how could that be um it's a very it's
it's a very important observation I
think it's it's sort of worth addressing
um and you're absolutely right they they
do find um uh mutations that even in
some cases have clonally expanded in for
example skin tissue they found them in
the the crypts and the colon um you
these are very common findings actually
many of which have been made by Michael
stratton's group um who I think would be
very much in the C in the camp that the
mutations cause cancer and so um what a
key factor of sort of genes as a cause
of cancer is that one genetic alteration
is not
sufficient um so that that's sort of a
key um you know I think takeaway for for
for this um is that for example if you
look at um even tumors arise in leaf
Rani ATI yeah those tumors will have
that germine p53 mutation with loss of
the wild type of but they're going have
other mutations as well other an you
know other
anagen um that you know contribute to to
to to tumor growth and as you described
many of those genetic changes also uh
affect metabolism for you know the RAS
signaling pathway which is a highly
recurrent U you know really recurrently
mutated signaling pathway in a whole
range of of cancers uh is know to be
very important for example in glucose
transport so so again you know the the
the underlying genetic alterations uh
really fuel a lot of these sort of
metabolic um uh abnormalities that are
universally universally seen across
tumors yeah well I'm I mean I we know
the rash mutation damages oxidative
phosphorilation pen Wang showed that a
while ago that mutation you don't you
don't get cancer with healthy
mitochondria if you want to prevent
cancer you got to keep your mitochondria
healthy all cancer cells that we know of
have abnormalities in the number
structure and function of mitochondria
that's the commonality of all cancer
they have different genetic mutations
for sure but that's that's a downstream
effect of the Ros production well so
what we're saying again with P5 that's
really the Upstream cause right so if if
people are born with the P5 uh with the
p-53 mutation or a brocca mutation for
that matter we know that they're at
elevated risk for cancer right so that's
why we do brocca screening um you know
again to sort of know which people and
families to follow yeah and and you
can't get that information by looking at
their mitochondria no no no no that's
that's manifest later yeah no no that's
not what I'm I'm I'm talking about the
the mutation bracka one damages
oxidative phosphorilation that's that's
what I'm so we're going we have to
recognize what is primary cause of
disregulated cell growth versus
secondary cause of disregulated cell
growth if bra if we have 50% of the
women that have Brack mutation have
breast cancer there's 50% of the women
that have Brack mutation that don't have
breast cancer and every woman that has
the breast tumor has damaged to
mitochondria um that means the
mitochondrial damage precedes is the
origin of the disregulated growth
because we could have the mutation
without the disregulated growth but we
can never have the disregulated growth
without the damage to the mitochondria
ox
insufficient oxidative phosphorilation
so mutations are neither necessary nor
sufficient to lead to disregulated cell
growth but mitochondrial inefficiency of
is is is necessary and sufficient with a
with a with a compensatory fermentation
so I I think I think we always have
though is a known risk factor right so
yeah well you have risk factors for sure
but is is it a primary risk factor or a
secondary risk factor I mean it has to
be a primary risk factor because you can
identify who's at risk by by genetic
sequencing yes but they don't all get
cancer right but you you can know who's
at risk right you know again as as we
discussed I'm not saying you can't does
every person who has mitochondrial
disruption get cancer does that no
that's that's you have to have the
compens compensatory fermentation you
you have to if you have it damaged to
the mitochondria you'll kill the cell
quick but the question is getting back
to primary and secondary because I think
this is so important when we're looking
at at Origins um is the mutation a
primary cause or a secondary cause I
look at it if it's a primary cause the M
the there every time you have that
mutation you get the tumor regardless of
whether it's a breast tumor colon tumor
whatever it is it's 100% penetrant
there's no ambiguity but if a person
carries the mutation and never develops
the tumor in their lifetime then that
was not a primary risk factor was a
secondary risk factor well but but then
how do you explain the increased risk
you know on a population basis of people
that carry a brocca one mutation yeah
but there's a lot of wom why are they
getting more yeah but why are they why
is there more cancer in that population
because that that mutation damages
oxidative phosphorilation right so
that's a cause and effect right yeah so
that but you cannot find a tumor without
damage uh insufficient oxidative
phosphorilation but you can find women
with TR of one mutation that don't have
cancer so or or ever get cancer in their
lifetime so yes it's a very significant
risk factor but it's a secondary risk
factor we have the the key is the prim
what is the primary elicitor of
disregulated cell growth and it is is
insufficient respiration with
compensatory fermentation which has been
found in every known cancer that we that
anyone has looked at uh no one has ever
seen tumors with normal oxid a
phosphorilation in Vivo in vitro you see
this because oxygen consumption is not
an accurate marker for respiration in
vitro but in Vivo it is so so I I think
you you have to look at Pro I think it's
important for for people to look up the
differences between primary and
secondary risk factors smoking is a
secondary risk factor obesity is a
secondary risk factor ins insufficient o
inter inflammation uh viral infections
um papiloma virus hepatitis these are
all uh secondary risk factors they cause
cancer only if they damage oxidative
phosphorilation then you get disre let
me just say this this concept of a
primary and a secondary risk factor is
really not a widely accepted sort of
concept so when we you know in sort of
maybe I would argue the mainstream we
talk about risk factors there is sort of
risk factor but they're also underlying
causes and so they're those are two
different things so if you create a
mouse that's that's GNA get cancer later
in his life the underlying cause is is
that genetic alteration and if you you
know and if you expose that mice to
chemicals and or you know do any number
of other things yeah that that that mice
or or radiation that Mouse will likely
get cancer at a younger age so you know
you can look at again in in in human
populations again we we know that um
these uh germine genetic mutations are
are profoundly increase our genetic risk
and but other things can can increase
that risk also so we know all of us have
multiple sources of cancer risk so when
we talk about so all risk factors are
you know they they have different
magnitudes but we don't really think of
primary and secondary the the primary
underlying cause is are the cancer
mutations that fundamentally change how
cancer cells operate and how they
function um including their metabolic
defects again this is a point we
disagree on but yeah well I look at the
the the nuclear cytoplasmic transfer
experiments if if the neoplastic growth
in a tumor is driven by genetic
mutations in the nucleus according to
the somatic mutation Theory disregulated
cell growth is caused by one two dozen
mutations doesn't make any difference
drivers and whatever and you take that
nucleus and put it in a new cytoplasm
and you no longer get disregulated cell
growth that says that those mutations
are whatever they were no matter how
many there were uh were not the drivers
of the disregulated growth if I take the
normal nucleus and put it in a tumor
cytoplasm I get disregulated growth so
clearly clearly it's the cytoplasm and
the mitochondria and these experiments
have been done over and over again in
all kinds of different systems uh
testing they were not testing the
sematic mutations Theory but the results
from those experiments clearly tell us
that the mutations in the nucleus of
these tumor cells are not the drivers of
disregulated cell growth I mean it's
hard to reject those findings you can
say Well they're primary causes okay if
that's the primary cause how come when I
put that nucleus in a new cytoplasm I
don't get disregulated growth and if I
take a normal nucleus healthy and put it
in a cancer cytoplasm I get disregulated
cell growth how you explain that that's
not explainable on the sematic mutation
Theory no matter how you cut the and
look at it um you got to think and what
what what troubles me is that a lot of
folks ignore those nuclear mitochondrial
cytoplasma transfer experiments that
clearly show um uh that this and the
only person that really understood that
was was the late Ruth Sager at Harvard
she said these nuclear transfer
experiments support OT warberg theory of
cancer um because you're not getting the
disregulated growth uh when you put a a
a tumor nucleus into a into a when you
put a a tumor nucleus into a normal
cytoplasm so why you don't get the T why
you don't get this regulated growth when
it has all the driver genes and the
broken chromosomes and the somatic
mutations why that doesn't cause the the
disregulated cell growth that's the big
question and the bigger question is how
come nobody discusses these kinds of
experiments this is my conundrum um uh
you know uh people were saying oh uh
well I didn't know about those
experiments well I think everybody needs
to know those experiments and look at
them and and say how do you explain how
do you explain this phenomenon uh of
cancer disregulated
growth based on these nuclear cytoplasm
transfer experiments they're not
consistent uh with this somatic mutation
Theory uh um so I I I I I I want to just
say that and I think people need to look
at all the evidence um I don't look at
it any different from the the geocentric
heliocentric theory of the of the solar
system for 1800 years we were using
epicycles and deference to try to
explain how planets and and uh celestial
bodies revolved around an immovable
Earth an immovable Earth okay it took
1800 years before cernic said maybe
maybe we got it all wrong maybe the sun
is the center and the planets are all
revolving around the Sun and then uh
Kepler came in with the with the helical
orbits and Galileo with the telescope
and all of a sudden everybody says yeah
uh the Earth revolves around the Sun I I
look at the sematic mutation Theory and
the and the mitochondrial metabolic
Theory as at exactly the same position
that we have today once we realize that
cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder the solution to the problem
will be quite apparent and when you take
people that have cancer and remove the
fuels that drive the disregulated cell
growth then you start to get management
of the disorder and people will start
living longer at a healthier overall and
quality of life that was progression
free and overall survival will increase
dramatically and we're beginning to see
this now in all these stage four cancer
people who are shifting to metabolic
therapy so so the bottom line is I I
think as long as we consider that cancer
is a genetic disease we're not going to
drop those death rates in any
significant way for this foreseeable
future once you're realize that it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disease I think
we can drop the death rate by 50% in
five to to 10 years depending on how you
go after you're going to see that needle
drop significantly but if we're chasing
genes and we're doing these genomic Mega
maps and all this kind of stuff and all
these people are dying from cancer uh
something has to change here and I think
you got to look at the nuclear transfer
mitochon you have to look at all the
data driver genes that don't cause
neoplastic growth nuclear transfer
experiments and then you have to say to
yourself maybe we got it all wrong maybe
we're not right and uh and and that's
what the field found when you put the
sun in the center of the solar system
everything made sense you didn't need
epicycles any longer okay so so that's
my view and I think I'm right and I
think we're going to drop this death
rate very very big once people come to
realize that they can't live without a
fermentation metabolism and that's not
difficult to Target targeting
fermentation is a hell of a lot easier
than targeting a bunch of of of of genes
which which may or may not lead to uh
overall outcome now now I I only have
time for one more question um so I want
to get this one out and it will give you
the opportunity I believe to respond Dr
buns if that's what you're hoping to do
which I imagine it is um now this will
go back into treatment and management of
cancer okay um we have all these
different treatments right now that
could that you know sort of on a
spectrum are helpful um some aren't it
just depends on the person a lot of
times I you know I I've personally
witnessed somebody in my life go through
chemotherapy they were diagnosed and
then went through chemotherapy and four
to five weeks later they died and so it
really took them out now now that
happens a lot and also chemotherapy
helps a lot of people too so I'm not
saying it's all bad it's all good um
some of the treatments for cancer you
know you have chemotherapy hormone
therapy um immunotherapy radiation
therapy stem cell therapy there's a
bunch of
others uh and speaking with you DR or
Professor CED you you have talked to me
before about other solutions to manage
or um more or less to manage cancer kill
cancer cells um I would imagine that
your take on some of these more
traditional Cancer Treatments is that
you probably would say they are not as
beneficial for people to use today based
on everything you just said but I wanted
to ask you Dr buns um if if if you think
that the if there's one particular
cancer treatment that you have seen to
be the most effective for managing
treating cancer and why and then I would
ask you the same thing Dr CED but you go
ahead Dr buns first yeah yeah yeah so um
so you know these are really exciting
times for cancer research um you know
for for a whole number of reasons but um
you and
I'll sort of using your um you know your
your sort of um you know looking at the
different theories for how the heavenly
bodies move in in the universe I you
know I think so the he the heliocentric
theory in my view is really um you know
I I think it's a nice analogy for what
we're seeing uh really with the with the
role of genes in cancer um you know so
in a sense you know um the the cancer
Gene theory in biomedical research is
sort of in my in my view sort of the
equivalent of the heliocentric theory um
and and why is that so so I guess you
know what we can ask what's the strength
of the of the hel of the heliocentric
theory is it is it just one group of
people arguing with another group and I
guess there still are people today right
you know who think it's a there's a flat
Earth or the you know the sun's going
around the earth or or whatnot but the
really wonderful thing about the
heliocentric theory and other theories
like it is that is is there power for us
to understand um the universe and and
for the power for us to make certain
predictions right if we know how the
heavenly bodies move it helps us
understand Tides you know we can we can
predict the uh you know the next us
solar eclipse you know down to the
minute you know down exactly to where
it's going to happen um you so all of
these types of things you know we we can
we can use that the our our knowledge of
of of planets to sort of launch a probe
into the into heavens and have it you
know years later sort of fly you know
within a couple of kilometers of Pluto
you know and this is because we know
with the hel the heliocentric theory
gives empowers us to kind of to do all
these you know all to do all these
amazing things um the cancer Gene
theories is is really like that in a lot
of ways so um you know talking about
some of the the the therapies that have
sort of come up in recent years and and
some of those that were in the pipeline
um some of the targeted therapies are
really profound profoundly changing the
Outlook of of people with certain kinds
of cancers now certainly there's some
cancers we haven't been able to hit hit
very well um but there are a number of
uh number of leukemias um that that have
famously uh and very dramatically
responded to targeted Therapeutics now
what are those um Therapeutics targeting
they're actually targeting the products
of cancer Associated mutations so for
example the classic example is GLE which
is really the first um the first you
know widely used targeted therapeutic
against a specif a specific genetic
alteration in um in in a a type of
leukemia called CML or chronic myologist
leukemia so we can predict who's going
to respond to that to glec by sequencing
their by you know molecularly molecular
characterization of their of their uh of
their tumors um and similarly for um for
egfr uh Inhibitors and and lung Cancers
and on and on so the list fortunately is
growing for very targeted um
Therapeutics that we we can use to
Target certain uh uh genetic alterations
in addition now particular type of
therapy I'm really very bullish on and I
think we're going to continue to see
really uh great uh strides in this area
is immune B our immune-based therapy so
basically taking advantage of the the
the different ways that um the immune
system recognizes normal Cells versus
cancer cells and we know one very for
example one very important aspect of of
what makes um tumor cells
immunogenic um is really their
mutational load for example so all those
different genetic alterations in that
occur in the cancer cell um you know
cause the production of these um
abnormal proteins which then can in turn
be recognized by the immune system but
cancer also as a result of genetic
alterations like p-53 will sort of
downregulate the presentation of those
antigens so I think we're learning now
of ways of activating um of te- cells uh
against specific um cancer Associated
genetic alterations um and I think
that's really where the next generation
of really powerful Therapeutics is going
to come from and so we'll kind of get
away from using what these these
treatments are essentially poisons to
really using our knowledge of cancer
genetics to devise very specific
therapies that can really Target those
specific alterations and you know
leaving the rest of our tissues uh you
know healthy and able to sort of um you
know continue to grow normally so so I
think that's something that we have to
look forward to in the decades ahead and
well hopefully the years ahead I don't
think it'll even really be decades okay
awesome and uh Professor CED I'm going
to ask you the same and I also have to
preface this with uh I just got an alert
that I have 10% left on my camera yeah
so keep it as concise as you could
please well well I think the imuno the
immunotherapies are based on the sematic
mutation Theory we have 1,700 people a
day dying from cancer those therapies
have done nothing to drop the death rate
as a matter of fact they've looked at
all these genes over the last uh 92
genes and they improve overall Survival
by 2.4 months I mean let's be honest
these poor people are suffering
immensely from Miss from a
misunderstanding of what of what the
nature is we have what we call
hyperprogressive diseases you give
immunotherapies yes you some of those uh
targets are on normal cells you blow out
somebody's liver or kidney as the result
of trying to help them uh what is going
on with that why would you treat any
member of our species with any kind of a
therapy that has a remote possibility of
hurting them or worse yet killing them I
mean this carti immunotherapy katuda
Divo this is all this is is based on an
incorrect Theory we're not going to drop
the death rate anytime soon as long as
you consider this is a genetic disease
uh uh Fred you're telling you're you're
just you're you're just pushing we're
not going to drop the death rate my
friend uh that stuff ain't going to help
there's massive evidence to say it's not
dropping the death rate it's killing
people and people are making a huge
profit on drugs that don't work yes
there's always the blind squirrel that
finds a nut and you get somebody that
really responds really really well
trials right trials are killing these
they're not working they're not
improving overall survival in any
significant way you know that you know
the literature so so uh yeah look at the
look at the survival why we get all
these people dead you want to know if
something works you drop the death rate
you drop it big time you choose
metabolic therap you're going to drop
that death rate but God forbid anybody
tries it what what happens if we do
metabolic therapy and drop the death
rate by 50% in 10 years are we saying oh
we have the wrong Theory here let's go
back to the the we we should be
targeting tumor metabolism and actually
people are working on that well actually
that's an important Point Fred you know
the immunotherapies work better when you
take away glucose and glutamine and
transition the body to the now let me
tell you something if you shrink the
tumor down and you got a very small
tumor the surviving cells may have
something in common and there's where
immunotherapy could come in and be a
very powerful tool but it's at the end
not the beginning so so so because now
you take advantage we have all the tools
needed to manage cancer effectively
we're just not using them in the
appropriate way at this at this time and
place okay and with
that I think what I'm going to say is uh
I'm going to direct everybody to go to
both of your different pieces of work
your literature that you have created on
these topics very very important work
that both of you have done um I think
that if we wanted to we could do a
followup on this with some additional
questions if that's something that we
wanted to do um I'd ask you know
everybody watching to let me know your
thoughts on that if we ought to but um
where can people find your work first Dr
buns
yeah yeah so you you you know my
textbook is available on Amazon and book
seller near you so I I'd invite you know
that's a great introduction I think to
the topic uh where I talk very broadly
about cancer
ideology um all the way through therapy
so I I think that'll hopefully um be
useful for people that're trying to get
a little bit their feet wet in this um
yeah and and then you know again we've
you know we we published in very you
know very focused areas of cancer
research and I really invite people to
really look at any of uh these you know
these studies that that we've been
involved with over the years so I think
it's really you know again um you know I
the one thing I I will agree with is
that that you know too many people are
dying of cancer um but it's really not
for a lack of effort and I think
um we're we're we're rapidly entering I
think a new era where we're really going
to see some uh some some really real
Improvement in some of the most
refractory types of cancer
awesome yeah that's that's the hope
that's what we're going for and and same
with you um Professor CED where can
people find your work please well I I I
um I published the book also in 2012
which is selling more now than it's ever
sold um it's but I also publish all open
access uh you know we're encouraged here
at Boston College to publish Open Access
so people can read there's no pay walls
that hide the stuff uh so guys anybody
who wants to uh look at this just put my
name in and you'll get the Open Access
Publications um and uh because the the
change will come from the demand of the
of the people once the people come to
understand what's going on they're going
to make they're going to make the change
I don't think change is going to come
from the top it's going to come from the
bottom and one the when you get more and
more people educated to know what the
nature of cancer is and how to
effectively manage it in these what that
we write about then you're going to
start to see the change until that
happens I I don't see much but but it's
I I agree with
Fred uh there's going to be a massive
Paradigm Shift coming very very soon a
and the cancer patients are going to
benefit from it immensely